0------------------------------------------------



**Catalog 628-3**

# **Magnitude® Magnetic Bearing Centrifugal Chillers**

**Model WMC, D Vintage 86 to 400 Tons (300 to 1400 kW) R-134a or R-513A Refrigerant 60/50 Hz**

1------------------------------------------------



**Table of Contents**



**Manufactured in an ISO 9001 & ISO 14001 certified facility**

\*TMC models are outside the scope of WCCL certification program

©2022 Daikin Applied. Illustrations and data cover the Daikin Applied product at the time of publication and we reserve the right to make changes in design and construction at any time without notice.

2------------------------------------------------

| 0                                                                                                                 | 1                                                 | 2   | 3                     | 4                                 | 5              | 6              |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------|:----|:----------------------|:----------------------------------|:---------------|:---------------|
| Magnitude® Magn Bearing Centrifugal WMC 86 - 400 T Heat Recovery options avail 1600-6800 MBH Heat option availabl | etic Chiller ons able Recovery e Model WME Single |     | Model WMC             |                                   |                |                |
| Magnitude® Magn Bearing Centrifugal WMC 86 - 400 T Heat Recovery options avail 1600-6800 MBH Heat option availabl | etic Chiller ons able Recovery e Model WME Single | Mag | nitude® Magneti WME • | c Bearing Centrif 400 - 1600 Tons | ugal Chiller   | ugal Chiller   |
| Magnitude® Magn Bearing Centrifugal WMC 86 - 400 T Heat Recovery options avail 1600-6800 MBH Heat option availabl | etic Chiller ons able Recovery e Model WME Single |     |                       |                                   | Model WME Dual | Model WME Dual |



<span id="page-2-0"></span>**Introduction**

## **Technology That Just Makes Sense**

The industry's next generation of centrifugal chillers is here today with Daikin Magnitude® chillers. This technology incorporates centrifugal compressors utilizing integral variable frequency drives with oil-free operation thanks to magnetic bearings. Direct-drive technology and high efficiency compressor(s) are used in conjunction with highly efficient heat exchangers, as well as other important features including:

- State-of-the-art magnetic bearing compressor with oil-free technology
- Unit-mounted Variable Frequency Drive
- Positive pressure design
- Hermetic, permanent magnet, direct-drive motor
- User-friendly MicroTech® controls
- Open Choices™ controls feature for BAS flexibility
- R-134a or R-513A refrigerant
- AHRI certification

## **Features and Benefits Summary**

#### **The Compressor Technology**

- Magnetic bearing system that results in greater efficiency and reliability, more sustainable performance, reduced operating and maintenance costs, and low vibration and sound levels compared to traditional oil centrifugals.
- Heat recovery capability offered with the latest TMC version.

#### **Integrated Variable Frequency Drive (VFD)**

• Unit-mounted VFD modulates compressor speed to obtain optimum efficiency at all load and lift conditions.

#### **The Control Technology**

• Onboard digital electronics provide smart controls and include a regenerative power system, user-friendly operator interface, RapidRestore® option, and Open Choices™ BAS flexibility.

#### **Certifications and Standards**

• Meets ASHRAE Std. 90.1, AHRI 550/590 and IBC/ OSHPD Seismic, and contributes to LEED® credits.

#### **Factory Testing**

• Ensures trouble free startup and reliable operation.

3------------------------------------------------



**Features and Benefits**

# <span id="page-3-0"></span>**The Compressor Technology**

Model WMC's efficiency and reliability is due to its cuttingedge permanent magnet motor and magnetic bearing compressor technology. A digitally-controlled magnetic bearing system replaces conventional oil lubricated bearings and a direct drive motor eliminates the need for a lubricated gear box. The compressor shaft, shown in [Figure 1](#page-3-1), levitates

#### *Figure 1: Magnetic Bearing Compressor*

**3**

<span id="page-3-1"></span>**1**

on a magnetic cushion and is the compressor's only major moving component. Sensors at each magnetic bearing provide real-time feedback to the bearing control system. As a result of this sophisticated design, model WMC has many advantages over chillers with traditional centrifugal compressors.

- 1. Magnetic Bearings and Bearing Sensors
- 2. Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motor
- 3. Backup Bearings
- 4. Shaft and Impellers
- 5. Compressor Cooling

## **Oil-Free Compressor Design Benefits**

**5**

**1**

**3**

**2**

#### *No Oil Management System = Greater Reliability*

**4**

With magnetic bearings operating in a magnetic field instead of oil-lubricated bearings, the oil handling equipment is removed. No need for:

- oil pumps
- oil reservoirs
- oil coolers
- oil filters
- water regulating valves
- oil relief valves
- oil storage and disposal
- oil system controls, starter, piping, heaters, etc.

that are needed to maintain oil quality. These devices can be a fault source in traditional chillers, and removing them significantly increases unit and system reliability.

#### *No Oil System = Reduced Maintenance Costs*

With oil removed from the system, oil samples, oil changes, oil system maintenance, oil filter changes, and leaks are eliminated.

#### *Totally Oil-Free Operation = Greater Efficiency*

The use of oil-free magnetic bearing technology significantly increases chiller efficiency by reducing frictional losses within the bearing system.

In addition, efficiency improvements can be realized since there is no oil to coat the heat transfer surfaces.

#### *No Oil Loss = Sustainable Performance*

With no possibility of oil loss at light loads or due to worn seals, the original energy saving efficiency can be maintained for the life of the chiller.

#### *No Oil System = Low Vibration & Sound Levels*

With the use of magnetic bearings, the compressor vibration levels are extremely low, minimizing vibration that could be transmitted to the structure.

With low vibration levels, sound levels are lower compared to traditional centrifugal chillers.

4------------------------------------------------



## <span id="page-4-0"></span>**Additional Compressor Design Benefits**

Model WMC's magnetic bearing compressor design offers many benefits not only because of its oil free design but also because of its use of a positive pressure refrigerant and a variable frequency drive.

### *Low Operating Costs*

Model WMC offers world class part load efficiency due to its advanced permanent magnet motor and magnetic bearing VFD compressor design. This allows for significant energy savings at off-design conditions compared to fixed speed chillers. See [AHRI Certification on page 6](#page-5-1) for more information on part load performance.

## **Economizer Option**

An economizer option is available for improved efficiency. An economizer is a well-proven device to increase a refrigerant circuit's capacity and efficiency. Warm liquid from the condenser is fed into the economizer where it is cooled by flashing off liquid also from the condenser. The flash gas is piped to a compressor interstage point. Lowering the liquid refrigerant temperature to the evaporator decreases its enthalpy (heat content) and results in a greater amount of heat absorption from the chilled water.

# **Templifier Model**

WMC models are now available with a Templifier (TMC) option. Templifier (TMC) Heat Pump Water Heaters are designed to economically turn waste heat into useful heat. Waste heat is extracted from a heat source and sent to the evaporator. The condenser delivers the useful heat for applications such as space heating, domestic hot water heating and process loads. In addition, the advanced MicroTech II controller allows the user to adjust the leaving condenser water temperature setpoint for accurate hot water temperature control.

Commercial and institutional buildings throw away vast amounts of rejected heat from the air-conditioning load to the atmosphere through their cooling towers. TMC can help reduce operating costs by producing chilled water while also providing hot water by recovering wasted heat from the condenser.

TMC units are versatile in their application, producing chilled water while heating by recovering otherwise wasted heat and controlling the leaving condenser water temperature. They are first and foremost economic machines, providing heat at a lower cost than fossil fuels and providing an attractive return on investment

## <span id="page-4-1"></span>**Integrated Variable Frequency Drive**

A Variable Frequency Drive (VFD) modulates compressor speed in response to load and evaporator/condenser pressure. When minimum speed is reached, moveable inlet guide vanes redirect the gas flow into the impeller. VFD's have the following benefits:

- Reduced annual energy costs when there are long periods of part load operation and/or low compressor lift (lower condenser water temperature)
- Reduced motor starting inrush current
- Reduced size of backup generators used to provide emergency power to chillers used on mission critical applications
- Increased power factor to reduce utility surcharges

## **WMC Reduced Harmonic Option**

The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has developed a standard (IEEE519) that defines acceptable limits of site specific system current and voltage distortion. The designer may wish to consult this standard to ensure acceptable levels of harmonic distortion are maintained.

The standard VFD includes 5% line reactors, which dramatically reduce the harmonic distortion. An optional unitmounted harmonic filter is available for all models to meet lower harmonic level requirements.

# **The Control Technology**

It is only fitting that this revolutionary chiller design be matched with the advanced control technology to provide the ultimate chiller performance. Our control design includes many unique energy-saving features and interface enhancements.

## **MicroTech**® **II Controller**

The model WMC chiller utilizes MicroTech® II digital control electronics to proactively manage unit operation and provide control of external chilled water and cooling tower pumps. The compressor runs at the minimum speed necessary to maintain cooling capacity and lift (which decreases with lower condenser water temperatures), thus minimizing energy usage over the entire range of operating conditions. By constantly monitoring chiller status and real time data, the MicroTech® II controller will automatically take proactive measures to relieve abnormal conditions or shut the unit down if a fault occurs.

5------------------------------------------------

| 0                | 1                        |
|:-----------------|:-------------------------|
| Compressor Start | Fast Loading to 80% Load |
| 43 sec           | 120 sec*                 |



<span id="page-5-0"></span>Additional smart features that optimize operating efficiency have been incorporated into our MicroTech® II controls:

- Cooling tower control including on/off, staging, and VFD
- Direct control of water pumps
- Chilled water rest
- Demand limit control
- Ability to stage up to four WMC chillers

## **Operator Interface**

Operation simplicity was one of the main considerations in the development of the MicroTech® II control system. The operator interface is a 15-inch, color touch-screen monitor that is mounted on an adjustable arm. Key operating parameters and setpoints are easily accessible. For added convenience, the unit Operating and Maintenance Manual is also viewable on the touch-screen panel.

In order to track chiller performance, the MicroTech® II controller can record and plot water temperatures, refrigerant pressures, and motor load. These values can be downloaded through a convenient USB port in the interface and exported into a spreadsheet for further evaluation and record purposes. The trend history screen is shown in [Figure 2.](#page-5-2)

#### <span id="page-5-2"></span>*Figure 2: Operator Interface Trend History Screen*

The controller memory (no batteries required) also retains the fault history for troubleshooting and monitoring unit performance. A time/date stamp is associated with each fault. The fault history can be downloaded through the USB port.

### **RapidRestore®**

Mission critical facilities such as data centers and hospitals are demanding stringent capabilities for chillers to restart and reach full load operation quickly in the event of a power loss. With the capability of RapidRestore®, Magnitude® model WMC chillers are engineered to meet those needs. See [Table 1](#page-5-3) for specifications.

#### *Table 1: WMC RapidRestore***®** *Times- After Power Restoration*

<span id="page-5-3"></span>


**RapidRestore® –** Quickly restores cooling capacity when power is restored after a power failure

- **Compressor Start –** Amount of time required for the chiller to restart
- **Fast Loading –** Amount of time required for the chiller to reach a certain load condition

## **Open Choices™ BAS Flexibility**

The exclusive Open Choices™ feature provides seamless integration and comprehensive monitoring, control, and twoway data exchange using industry standard protocols such as LonTalk®, BACnet® or Modbus®. Open Choices™ offers simple and inexpensive flexibility to use the Building Automation System (BAS) of your choice without an expensive gateway panel. Open Choices™ benefits include:

- Easy to integrate into your BAS of choice
- Factory- or field-installed communications module
- Integrated control logic for factory options
- Easy-to-use local user interface
- Comprehensive data exchange

## **Certifications and Standards**

As with many other Daikin Applied chiller products, the Magnitude® model WMC meets all necessary certifications and standards.

### <span id="page-5-1"></span>**AHRI Certification**

Part load performance can be presented in terms of Integrated Part Load Value (IPLV), which is defined by AHRI Standard 550/590. Based on AHRI Standard 550/590, and as shown in [Figure 3](#page-5-4), a typical chiller can operate up to 99% of the time at off-peak conditions and usually spends most of this time at less than 60% of design capacity.

#### <span id="page-5-4"></span>*Figure 3: IPLV Defined by AHRI Standard 550/590*

6------------------------------------------------



WMC chillers are rated and certified to AHRI Standard 550/590. The ability of the WMC chillers to achieve very high part load efficiencies, as evidenced by their world-class IPLV ratings, is due primarily to the use of a variable frequency drive and the low friction of the magnetic bearing system. For more information on variable frequency drives, see [Integrated](#page-4-1)  [Variable Frequency Drive on page 5](#page-4-1).

## **Compliance with ASHRAE Std. 90.1**

ASHRAE Standard 90.1 was developed to assist owners and designers make informed choices on a building's design, systems, and equipment selection. Model WMC can significantly exceed ASHRAE 90.1 minimum efficiency requirements.

## **IBC/OSHPD Seismic Certification**

Daikin Magnitude® WMC chillers have been tested and certified by an independent agency, experts in seismic analysis and design to meet IBC seismic and OSHPD preapproval. Find more information about seismic requirements and HVAC systems at [www.DaikinApplied.com.](www.DaikinApplied.com)

## **LEED®**

For building owners who wish to pursue Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED®) Green Building Certification, the performance of the WMC may contribute points towards Energy and Atmosphere (EA) Credits.

Points earned for Optimize Energy Performance (formerly EA Credit 1) are awarded based on overall building efficiency. The high efficiency of the WMC will contribute to the total points earned for this credit.

Enhanced Refrigerant Management (formerly EA Credit 4) qualification is partially determined by tonnage and refrigerant quantity. Vessel stack and tube count selections will affect the quantity of refrigerant in the chiller.

Consult with your Daikin Applied sales representative for more information.

### **The IEEE 519-2014 Standard**

The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has developed a standard that recommends distortion limits for both power utilities and their customers. The purpose of these limits is to ensure that the voltage distortion of the utility's public power grid is maintained at an acceptable level. To accomplish this, IEEE 5192014 presents recommended harmonic current distortion limits for utility customers. These limits are based on the peak demand of the customer. This is called the Total Demand Distortion (TDD). This standard provides a sliding scale for the recommended TDD limit for each utility customer. The greater the demand that a customer places on the utility, the more stringent the recommended TDD limits.

IEEE 519-2014 states that the TDD is to be measured at the point where a utility customer connects to the public utility.

It does not apply to any points inside the customer's facility; it only applies to the point where another utility customer could connect to the public power grid. If the utility's customers comply with the TDD limits stated in IEEE 519-2014, it is then the utility's responsibility to provide voltage to its customers that meets the harmonic voltage recommendations of this standard.

## **Harmonic Distortion Analysis**

An electronic calculation worksheet is available from Daikin that is intended to be used as a tool for estimating the Total Demand Distortion of a facility. It projects whether the facility complies with the TDD recommendations of IEEE 519-2014 and allows AC line reactors and/or harmonic filters to be added to the system to model their impact. Daikin can also provide custom harmonic distortion estimations when design data of the system is provided.

## **Factory Testing**

All Daikin Applied centrifugal chillers (50 or 60 hertz) are factory-tested prior to shipment. Operating and safety controls are checked for correct settings and operation. This testing helps reduce field start-up issues and maintain critical construction schedules.

7------------------------------------------------

| 0          | 1              | 2              | 3               | 4              |
|:-----------|:---------------|:---------------|:----------------|:---------------|
| Model      | Heat Exchanger | Length in (mm) | Width * in (mm) | Height in (mm) |
| 036D-SN    | E2209/C2009    | 134.70 (3421)  | 43.42 (1103)    | 79.02 (2007)   |
| 036D-SN    | E2212/C2012    | 169.59 (4308)  | 43.42 (1103)    | 79.02 (2007)   |
| 043D-SN    | E2609/C2209    | 135.72 (3447)  | 47.17 (1198)    | 84.01 (2134)   |
| 048D-SN    | E2609/C2209    | 135.72 (3447)  | 47.17 (1198)    | 84.01 (2134)   |
| 043D-SN    | E2612/C2212    | 170.61 (4333)  | 47.17 (1198)    | 84.01 (2134)   |
| 048D-SN    | E2612/C2212    | 170.61 (4333)  | 47.17 (1198)    | 84.01 (2134)   |
| 048D-SE*** | E2612/C2212    | 170.61 (4333)  | 47.17 (1198)    | 84.01 (2134)   |
| 060D-SN    | E3009/C2609    | 137.09 (3402)  | 55.17 (1401)    | 94.50 (2400)   |
| 060D-SN    | E3012/C2612    | 171.98 (4368)  | 55.17 (1401)    | 94.50 (2400)   |
| 060D-SE*** | E3012/C2612    | 171.98 (4368)  | 55.17 (1401)    | 94.50 (2400)   |



<span id="page-7-0"></span>**Dimensions**

## **Unit Dimensions**

Refer to as-built submittal drawings provided by a Daikin Applied sales representative for additional dimensional and weight data based on specific unit configuration details.

*Figure 4: WMC Dual Compressor Unit (2-pass, right-hand configuration, with grooved connections)* 


*Table 2: WMC Dual Compressor Dimensions* 

\* Width is based on unit without optional harmonic filters.

\*\*\* Denotes unit with economizer

8------------------------------------------------

| 0          | 1              | 2              | 3               | 4              |
|:-----------|:---------------|:---------------|:----------------|:---------------|
| Model      | Heat Exchanger | Length in (mm) | Width * in (mm) | Height in (mm) |
| 043S-SN    | E2209/C2009    | 130.80 (3322)  | 38.12 (965)     | 79.02 (2006)   |
| 048S-SN    | E2209/C2009    | 130.80 (3322)  | 38.12 (965)     | 79.02 (2006)   |
| 060S-SN    | E2609/C2209    | 130.80 (3322)  | 38.12 (965)     | 83.95 (2133)   |
| 060S-SE*** | E2609/C2209    | 130.80 (3322)  | 38.12 (965)     | 83.95 (2133)   |



#### *Figure 5: WMC Single Compressor Unit (2-pass, right-hand configuration, with grooved connections)*



\* Width is based on unit without optional harmonic filters.

\*\*\* Denotes unit with economizer

9------------------------------------------------

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
|     |     |



<span id="page-9-0"></span>## **Drawing Notes**

- 1. Final connections must allow for 0.5-inch +/- (12.7 mm) manufacturing tolerances.
- 2. 1.00-inch FPT (25.4 mm) evaporator and condenser relief valves must be piped per ANSI / ASHRAE 15. Number of relief valves is 1 per evaporator and 2 per condenser.
- 3. 0.375-inch (9 mm) suction nozzle relief valve must be piped per ANSI / ASHRAE 15.
- 4. Minimum Clearances (See [Figure 6](#page-9-1)):
	- Check local codes for any additional clearance requirements.
	- Installation layout should be designed by qualified personnel familiar with local codes.
- 5. 3.25-inch (83 mm) diameter lifting holes are provided. See installation manual (available at [www.DaikinApplied.](www.DaikinApplied.com) [com\)](www.DaikinApplied.com) for lifting instructions.
- 6. All water connections are given in standard U.S. nominal pipe sizes. Standard connections are suitable for welding or grooved couplings.
- 7. Unit shown has standard right-hand water connections. Left-hand connections are available for either vessel. ANSI-flanged nozzle connections are available upon request. When using ANSI-flanged connections add 0.5 inch (13 mm) to each flanged end. Dimensions shown are for units (evaporator / condenser) with standard design pressures. The waterside design pressure is 150 psi (1034 kPa). Consult the factory for unit dimensions with higher design pressures.
- 8. Unit vibration isolator pads are provided for field installation and when fully loaded are 0.25 inches (6 mm) thick.
- 9. The shipping skid adds 4.00 inches (105 mm) to the overall unit height.
- 10. If main power wiring is brought up through the floor, this wiring must be outside the envelope of the unit.
- 11. The unit is shipped with a full operating charge of refrigerant except with the Type B knockdown option.
- 12. Optional marine waterboxes are available upon request.

<span id="page-9-1"></span>#### *Figure 6: Minimum Clearances Based on Standard Waterboxes*

**NOTE:** Hinged type waterboxes may require more clearance. Consult your Daikin Applied sales representative for details.

10------------------------------------------------



**Options and Accessories**

<span id="page-10-0"></span>## **Unit Options**

## **Templifier Heat Recovery**

TMC Templifier units are equipped with centrifugal compressors and are available as a configuration, each with optional pass arrangements.

## **Export Packaging**

A wooden skid that aids in moving the unit and tight fitting plastic covering the entire unit to protect it from dirt and grime during transit and storage are standard. Open and closed crating is also offered as an option.

## **Pumpout Unit**

Pumpout units are available in a variety of sizes with singlephase or three-phase power and with or without storage tanks. Contact your Daikin Applied sales office for details.

## **Extended Warranties**

Extended 1, 2, 3, or 4 year warranties for parts only or for parts and labor are available for the compressor/motor only, the entire unit, or the entire unit including refrigerant.

## **Witness Performance Test**

The specified full and/or part load tests, as ordered, are performed in the presence of the customer under the supervision of a factory engineer and include compilation of the test data onto an easy-to-read spreadsheet.

## **Non-Witness Test**

The specified full and/or part load tests, as ordered, are performed under the supervision of a factory engineer; data is compiled, certified, and transmitted to the customer.

### **Refrigerant Charge**

Units ship with a full holding charge of R-134a or R-513A refrigerant as a standard. An inert gas holding charge is available as an option.

## **Knockdown Shipment**

Several options for a knockdown shipment to facilitate unit placement are available. See Retrofit Knockdown on [page](#page-17-1)  [18](#page-17-1) for details.

## **Vessel Options**

### **Marine Waterboxes**

Marine waterboxes that allow the end plate of the waterbox to be removed without disconnecting the water piping from the chiller are optional.

### **Flange Water Connections**

A standard unit will have grooved water connections. ANSI raised face flanges on either the evaporator or condenser are optional. Mating flanges must be provided by the field.

### **300 psi Water Side Vessel Construction**

150 psi water side vessels are standard. 300 psi water side vessels are optional.

## **Epoxy and Ceramic Coating**

Evaporator and condenser heads and marine waterboxes can be coated for corrosion protection with either epoxy or ceramic coatings. Tube sheets may also be ceramic coated.

### **Single Insulation - Evaporator Shell / Suction Piping**

0.75-inch thermal insulation on cold surfaces — excluding heads and waterboxes — is available.

#### **Single Insulation - Evaporator Heads and Waterboxes**

0.75-inch thermal insulation is available.

#### **Double Insulation - Evaporator Shell / Suction Piping**

1.5-inch thermal insulation on cold surfaces — excluding heads and waterboxes — is available.

#### **Double Insulation - Evaporator Heads and Waterboxes**

1.5-inch thermal insulation is available.

#### **Hinged Waterbox Covers and Heads**

Hinges for marine waterbox covers or heads (compact waterboxes) are available to aid in heat exchanger maintenance.

### **Tube Size, Wall Thickness and Material**

A wide range of tube options are available to accommodate most flow rates and fluids. Standard wall thickness is 0.025 inch. Wall thicknesses of 0.028-inch or 0.035-inch are optional.

## **Controls Options**

## **BAS Interface Module**

Factory-installed on the unit controller for the applicable protocol being used (Can also be retrofit):

- BACnet® MS/TP
- BACnet® IP
- BACnet® Ethernet
- LonWorks®
- Modbus® RTU

11------------------------------------------------



<span id="page-11-0"></span>## **Electrical Options**

### **Power Panel High Short Circuit Current Rating**

65 kA panel rating (Standard is 35 kA).

#### **Electro Magnetic Interference (EMI) and Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) Filter**

A filter for EMI and RFI is a factory-installed option.

#### **Ground Fault Protection**

Protects equipment from arcing ground fault damage from line-to-ground fault currents less than those required for conductor protection.

### **RapidRestore®**

Quickly restarts the unit and restores cooling capacity when power is restored after a power failure.

## **Special Order Options**

The following special order options are available; requiring factory pricing, additional engineering, and possible dimension changes or extended delivery:

- 1. Non-standard location of nozzle connections on heads (compact waterboxes) or marine waterboxes
- 2. Clad tube sheets
- 3. Sacrificial anodes in heads (compact waterboxes) or marine waterboxes
- 4. Spacer rings on heads to accommodate automatic tube brush cleaning systems (installed by others)
- 5. Remote-mounted refrigerant monitor, including accessories such as 4-20mA signal, strobe light, audible horn, and air pick-up filter

12------------------------------------------------

| 0             | 1            | 2            | 3            | 4             | 5                                                                       | 6                                                                                                      | 7                                                              | 8             | 9            | 10           | 11           | 12         | 13                       | 14          | 15                                                 |
|:--------------|:-------------|:-------------|:-------------|:--------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:-------------|:-------------|:-------------|:-----------|:-------------------------|:------------|:---------------------------------------------------|
| LORTNOC EVLAV | A/N          | LAUNAM       | CITAMOTUA    | LAUNAM        | LAUNAM LAUNAM LAUNAM LAUNAM A/N                                         | CITAMOTUA CITAMOTUA CITAMOTUA LAUNAM LAUNAM LAUNAM LAUNAM A/N                                          | CITAMOTUA CITAMOTUA CITAMOTUA A/N A/N                          | LAUNAM        | A/N          | LAUNAM       | A/N          | LAUNAM     | LAUNAM LAUNAM            | CITAMOTUA   | CITAMOTUA A/N A/N A/N                              |
| LEBAL         | PAT ERUSSERP | EVLAV FEILER | EVLAV FEILER | EVLAV ECIVRES | EVLAV EVLAV PAT EVLAV EVLAV YLFRETTUB YLFRETTUB ERUSSERP ECIVRES FEILER | EVLAV EVLAV EVLAV REYRD EVLAV EVLAV NOISNAPXE EVLAV EVLAV GNIGATS GNIGATS RETLIF FEILER LLAB LLAB LLAB | PAT SSALG EVLAV EVLAV EVLAV ERUSSERP THGIS FEILER YAW-3 FEILER | EVLAV ECIVRES | PAT ERUSSERP | EVLAV FEILER | REYRD RETLIF | EVLAV LLAB | EVLAV EVLAV ECIVRES LLAB | EVLAV KCEHC | PAT PAT PAT EVLAV ERUSSERP ERUSSERP ERUSSERP KCEHC |
| ELBBUB  .ON   | 1.0          | 2.0          | 3.0          | 4.0           | 56789.0                                                                 | 111213141516171.0                                                                                      | 8191021222.0                                                   | 32.0          | 42.0         | 52.0         | 62.0         | 72.0       | 8292.0                   | 3.0         | 13233343.0                                         |

| 0                                                                      | 1                      |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------|
| ERUTAREPMET ERUTAREPMET RETAW RETAW GNIRETNE GNIVAEL RESNEDNO RESNEDNO | ERUTAREPMET ENIL DIUQI |
| C C                                                                    | L                      |
| 30SU 40SU                                                              | 50SU                   |

| 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 1           | 2           | 3                     | 4                      | 5                                        | 6                                         |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------|:------------|:----------------------|:-----------------------|:-----------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | HCTIWS WOLF | NOITPIRCSED | HCTIWS WOLF RESNEDNOC | HCTIWS WOLF ROTAROPAVE | LORTNOC RELLIHC OT LANGIS WOLF RESNEDNOC | LORTNOC RELLIHC OT LANGIS WOLF ROTAROPAVE |
| E C C L E F FC E 01SU 4 30 0S SU U 20SU DNEGEL EVLAV ECIVRES SSALG THGIS DE ED VA LO AL V G FN EI ERUTAREPMET ROSNES YAW-EERHT EVLAV DETALUSNI YLFRETTUB EVLAV REZIMONOCE ]LANOITPO[ RECUDSNART RELORTNOC 50SU  .ON ELBBUB 20SU 30SU 40SU 50SU 01SC  .ON ELBBUB IR LEP LORTNOC RS )RESSERPMOC ROSSERPMOC TINU XOB TRAHC GF IT ET  ERUSSERP/ERUTAREPMET )ROSSRPMOC ROTOM WOLF EVLAV LLAB LAGUFIRTNEC ROSSERPMOC EVLA )V G K NC IRE NIARD / TNEV EVLAV FEILER CINORTCELE NOISNAPXE EVLAV REYRD RETLIF HCTIWS WOLF OT LANRETNI( GNIRAEB OT LANRETNI(CCMB PH SC ( S IF EF TP TT 43 51 62 53 72 GNILOOC VH VH 04 VH EGRAHCSID ROSSERPMOC 93 GNIGATS 24 50SU REZIMONOCE IT ET DIUQIL 34 14 VH NIAM VH 44 REZIMONOCE TT TP TT GF REZIMONOCE 01SU TUO NI 20SU 40SU TUO NI 30SU CCMB TP TT IT ET ET IT IT ET ET IT TP PMOC EF IF FE EF IF FC NOITCUS S05 7 8 SFE 52 SFC  42 U IT 9 92  ET GF GF ROTAROPAVE VH 11 VH 63 RESNEDNOC 31 6 5  13 73 VH S  4 VH NOITCUS VH GNIGATS 32  PMOC 3 22 03 REZIMONOCE 2 1 12 S GNILOOC CCMB TP TT GF 01 02 71 VH EGRAHCSID ROSSERPMOC TT TP  PT TT VH 54 GF 91 81 83 VH VH 61 82 21 23 33 |             |             |                       |                        |                                          |                                           |
| E C C L E F FC E 01SU 4 30 0S SU U 20SU DNEGEL EVLAV ECIVRES SSALG THGIS DE ED VA LO AL V G FN EI ERUTAREPMET ROSNES YAW-EERHT EVLAV DETALUSNI YLFRETTUB EVLAV REZIMONOCE ]LANOITPO[ RECUDSNART RELORTNOC 50SU  .ON ELBBUB 20SU 30SU 40SU 50SU 01SC  .ON ELBBUB IR LEP LORTNOC RS )RESSERPMOC ROSSERPMOC TINU XOB TRAHC GF IT ET  ERUSSERP/ERUTAREPMET )ROSSRPMOC ROTOM WOLF EVLAV LLAB LAGUFIRTNEC ROSSERPMOC EVLA )V G K NC IRE NIARD / TNEV EVLAV FEILER CINORTCELE NOISNAPXE EVLAV REYRD RETLIF HCTIWS WOLF OT LANRETNI( GNIRAEB OT LANRETNI(CCMB PH SC ( S IF EF TP TT 43 51 62 53 72 GNILOOC VH VH 04 VH EGRAHCSID ROSSERPMOC 93 GNIGATS 24 50SU REZIMONOCE IT ET DIUQIL 34 14 VH NIAM VH 44 REZIMONOCE TT TP TT GF REZIMONOCE 01SU TUO NI 20SU 40SU TUO NI 30SU CCMB TP TT IT ET ET IT IT ET ET IT TP PMOC EF IF FE EF IF FC NOITCUS S05 7 8 SFE 52 SFC  42 U IT 9 92  ET GF GF ROTAROPAVE VH 11 VH 63 RESNEDNOC 31 6 5  13 73 VH S  4 VH NOITCUS VH GNIGATS 32  PMOC 3 22 03 REZIMONOCE 2 1 12 S GNILOOC CCMB TP TT GF 01 02 71 VH EGRAHCSID ROSSERPMOC TT TP  PT TT VH 54 GF 91 81 83 VH VH 61 82 21 23 33 |             | .ON ELBBUB  | FC                    | FE                     | SFC                                      | SFE                                       |

| 0                 | 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|:------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| DNEGEL TRAHC WOLF | EVLAV SSALG DEDAOL EVLAV ERUTAREPMET YAW-EERHT REZIMONOCE RELORTNOC ECIVRES THGIS GNIRPS FEILER ROSNES EVLAV DETALUSNI YLFRETTUB EVLAV ]LANOITPO[ RECUDSNART ROSSERPMOC )RESSERPMOC ERUSSERP/ERUTAREPMET )ROSSRPMOC GF IT ET  ROTOM EVLAV LAGUFIRTNEC ROSSERPMOC EVLAV NIARD EVLAV CINORTCELE NOISNAPXE REYRD HCTIWS OT LANRETNI( OT LANRETNI(CCMB )GNIRPS( GNIRAEB LLAB KCEHC / TNEV FEILER EVLAV RETLIF WOLF S IF EF TP TT |



<span id="page-12-0"></span>#### **Refrigeration Diagram**

**Refrigeration Diagram**

#### *Figure 7: Refrigeration System Diagram*


TT

US04

BOX

US03

US02

**UNIT CONTROLLER**

**DESCRIPTION**

EVAPORATOR ENTERING WATER TEMPERATURE

CONDENSER ENTERING WATER TEMPERATURE

CONDENSER LEAVING WATER TEMPERATURE

**BUBBLE NO.**

US02 US03 US04 US05 CS10

LIQUID LINE TEMPERATURE

EVAPORATOR LEAVING WATER TEMPERATURE

**FLOW SWITCH**

**DESCRIPTION**

**BUBBLE NO.**

CF EF CFS EFS

CONDENSER FLOW SWITCH

EVAPORATOR FLOW SWITCH

CONDENSER FLOW SIGNAL TO CHILLER CONTROL

EVAPORATOR FLOW SIGNAL TO CHILLER CONTROL

13------------------------------------------------

| 0                                                              | 1                 |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------|
| Equipment Room Guidelines                                      | Temperature Range |
| Equipment room temperature, operating:                         | 40° - 104°F       |
| Equipment room temperature, standby, with water in vessels:    | 40° - 104°F       |
| Equipment room temperature, standby, without water in vessels: | 0° - 104°F        |

| 0         | 1                                                           | 2     |
|:----------|:------------------------------------------------------------|:------|
| Standby   | Maximum entering chilled water temperature (R-134a):        | 115°F |
| Standby   | Maximum entering chilled water temperature (R-513A):        | 112°F |
| Startup   | Maximum entering chilled water temperature (R-134a):        | 90°F  |
| Startup   | Maximum entering chilled water temperature (R-513A):        | 90°F  |
| Startup   | Maximum entering condenser water temperature:               | 105°F |
| Startup   | Minimum entering condenser water temperature:               | 40°F  |
| Operating | Maximum leaving chilled water temperature, cooling mode:    | 60°F  |
| Operating | Minimum leaving chilled water temperature, cooling mode:    | 38°F  |
| Operating | Maximum leaving condenser water temperature, cooling mode:  | 111°F |
| Operating | Maximum entering condenser water temperature, cooling mode: | 105°F |
| Operating | Minimum entering condenser water temperature, cooling mode: | 55°F  |



<span id="page-13-7"></span><span id="page-13-6"></span><span id="page-13-5"></span><span id="page-13-3"></span><span id="page-13-2"></span><span id="page-13-1"></span>**Application Considerations**

<span id="page-13-0"></span>#### <span id="page-13-4"></span>*Table 4: Operating Limit and Equipment Room Guidelines*



**NOTE:** Contact a Daikin Applied representative for performance at specific operating conditions as some limits may be dependent on unit configuration, including specific Heating Mode limits for TMC models.

## **Location Requirements**

Daikin WMC units are designed only for indoor, weatherprotected, non-freezing areas consistent with the NEMA 1 rating on the chiller, controls, and electrical panels. Equipment room temperature for operating and standby conditions is [40°](#page-13-1)  [- 104°F](#page-13-1) (4.4°C to 40°C).

# **Vibration Mounting**

The Magnitude® WMC chiller is almost vibration-free. Consequently, floor mounted spring isolators are not usually required. Neoprene mounting pads are shipped with each unit. It is suggested to continue to use flexible piping connectors to reduce sound transmitted into the pipe and to allow for expansion and contraction.

## **System Design**

## **Water Piping**

Field installed water piping to the chiller must include:

- air vents at the high points.
- a cleanable water strainer upstream of the evaporator and condenser inlet connections.
- a flow proving device for both the evaporator and condenser to prevent freeze up. Flow switches, thermal dispersion switches, or Delta-P switches can be used.

Note that flow switches are factory installed. Additional flow switches can be used only if they are connected in series with the ones already provided.

• sufficient shutoff valves to allow vessel isolation. The chiller must be capable of draining the water from the evaporator or condenser without draining the complete system.

It is recommended that field installed water piping to the chiller include:

- thermometers at the inlet and outlet connections of both vessels.
- water pressure gauge connection taps and gauges at the inlet and outlet connections of both vessels for measuring water pressure drop.

Piping must be supported to eliminate weight and strain on the fittings and connections. All evaporators and condensers have OGS-type grooved water connections (adhering to Standard AWWA C606) or optional flange connections. The installing contractor must provide matching mechanical connections. Chilled water piping must be adequately insulated.

**NOTE:** This product, in its standard configuration, is equipped with a shell and tube evaporator with carbon steel shell and copper tubes. The water or other fluid used in contact with the wetted surfaces of the heat exchangers must be clean and non-corrosive to the standard materials of construction. Daikin Applied makes no warranty as to the compatibility

14------------------------------------------------



<span id="page-14-0"></span>of fluids and materials. Non-compatible fluids may void the equipment warranty. If the compatibility of the fluid with the standard materials of construction is in question, a professional corrosion consultant should administer the proper testing and evaluate compatibility.

## **Variable Fluid Flow Rates and Tube Velocities**

Many chiller system control and energy optimization strategies require significant changes in evaporator water flow rates. The Magnitude® chiller line is well suited to take full advantage of these energy saving opportunities using different combinations of shell sizes, number of tubes, and pass arrangements.

Both excessively high and excessively low fluid flow rates should be avoided. Excessively high fluid flow rates and correspondingly high tube velocities will result in high fluid pressure drops, high pumping power, and potentially tube erosion or corrosion damage. Excessively low fluid flow rates and correspondingly low velocities should also be avoided as they will result in poor heat transfer, high compressor power, sedimentation and tube fouling.

### **Water Volume**

All chilled water systems need adequate time to recognize a load change to avoid short cycling of the compressors or loss of control. The potential for short cycling usually exists when the building load falls below the minimum chiller plant capacity or on close-coupled systems with very small water volumes.

Some of the things the designer should consider when looking at water volume are the minimum cooling load, the minimum chiller plant capacity during the low load period and the desired cycle time for the compressors.

Assuming that there are no sudden load changes and that the chiller plant has reasonable turndown, a rule of thumb of "gallons of water volume equal to two to three times the chilled water gpm flow rate" is often used.

A properly designed storage tank should be added if the system components do not provide sufficient water volume.

## **Heat Recovery**

All Daikin centrifugal Templifier units are factory tested prior to shipment and must be initially started at the job site by a factory-trained service technician. Failure to follow startup procedure can adversely affect the equipment warranty. One important consideration in the operation of TMC units is the relationship between the source heat flowing through the evaporator and the heating load being satisfied by the unit condenser.

If there is insufficient source heat going to the evaporator, the unit cannot produce sufficient heat in the condenser. TMC capacity is controlled by the hot water temperature leaving the condenser, but the temperature is reset downward as the delta-T decreases to give, in effect, a constant entering water temperature. The leaving hot water temperature decreases with decreasing heat load. The unit cools the source water to whatever extent is required to meet the heating load at any given time. If there is insufficient source heat available, the unit will try to pull down the source water temperature (perhaps to unacceptable levels) in an effort to extract the required heat.

This will lower evaporator leaving water temperature and can cause the compressor to pump against a higher refrigerant pressure difference than it was designed for. If the leaving evaporator water temperature drops below a predetermined value, the controller lowers (resets) the leaving hot water setpoint, before shutting the unit off in the case of further temperature drop.

## **Optimizing Efficiency**

A key to improving energy efficiency for any chiller is minimizing the compressor pressure lift. Reducing the lift reduces the compressor work and its energy consumption per unit of output.

The optimum plant design must take into account all of the interactions between chiller, pumps, and tower. The Daikin Energy Analyzer**™** II program is an excellent tool to investigate the entire system efficiency, quickly and accurately. It is especially good at comparing different system types and operating parameters. Contact your local Daikin Applied sales office for assistance on your particular application.

## **Evaporator**

### **Reducing Evaporator Fluid Flow**

Several popular chiller plant control practices — including Variable Primary Flow systems — advocate reducing the evaporator fluid flow rate as the chiller capacity is reduced. This practice can significantly reduce the evaporator pumping power while having little effect on chiller energy consumption. The Magnitude® WMC chillers, with their wide range of shell, tube, and pass combinations, are ideal for application in variable evaporator flow systems as long as the minimum and maximum tube velocities are taken into consideration when selecting the chiller.

If it is decided to vary the evaporator water flow rate, the rate of change should not exceed 10% per minute and should not exceed the minimum or maximum velocity limits.

#### **Evaporator Entering Water Temperature**

The maximum temperature of water entering the chiller for R-134a on standby must not exceed [115°F](#page-13-2) (46.1°C) and [112°F](#page-13-3) (44.4 °C) for R-513A on [page 14](#page-13-4). Maximum temperature entering for R-134a on startup must not exceed [90°F](#page-13-5) (32°C) and [90°F](#page-13-6) (32°C) for R-513A on [page 14.](#page-13-4)

15------------------------------------------------



## **Evaporator Leaving Water Temperature**

Warmer leaving chilled water temperatures will raise the compressor's suction pressure and decrease the lift, improving efficiency. Using 45°F (7°C) leaving water instead of the typical 42°F (5.5°C) will significantly reduce chiller energy consumption.

## **Evaporator Water Temperature Difference**

The industry standard has been a 10°F (5.5°C) temperature drop in the evaporator. Increasing the drop to 12°F or 14°F (6.6°C or 7.7°C) can improve chiller efficiency and reduce pump energy consumption.

## **Condenser**

## **Reducing Condenser Fluid Flow**

Several popular chiller plant control practices also advocate reducing the condenser fluid flow rate as the chiller load is reduced. This practice can significantly reduce the condenser pumping power, but it may also have the unintended consequence of significantly increasing compressor power since the leaving condenser water temperature is directly related to compressor lift and power. The higher compressor power will typically be larger than the condenser pumping power reduction and will result in a net increase in chiller plant energy consumption. Therefore, before this strategy is applied for energy saving purposes it should be extensively modeled or used in an adaptive chiller plant control system which will take into account all of the interdependent variables affecting chiller plant energy. If it is decided to use variable condenser fluid flow, the model WMC chiller can operate effectively as long as the minimum and maximum tube velocities are taken into consideration when selecting the chiller.

## **Reducing Condenser Entering Water Temperature**

As a general rule, a 1°F (0.5°C) drop in condenser entering water temperature will reduce chiller energy consumption by two percent. Cooler water lowers the condensing pressure and reduces compressor work. One or two degrees can make a noticeable difference. The incremental cost of a larger tower can be small and provide a good return on investment.

When the ambient wet bulb temperature is lower than design, the entering condenser water temperature of Magnitude® WMC chillers can be lowered to improve chiller performance.

Chillers can start with entering condenser water temperatures as low as [40°F](#page-13-7) (4.4°C). For short periods of time during startup, the entering condenser water temperature can even be lower than the leaving chilled water temperature.

Depending on local climatic conditions, using the lowest possible entering condenser water temperature may be more costly in total system power consumed than the expected savings in chiller power would suggest, due to the excessive fan power required.

In this scenario, cooling tower fans would continue to operate at 100% capacity at low wet bulb temperatures. The tradeoff between better chiller efficiency and fan power should be analyzed for best overall system efficiency. The Energy Analyzer**™** II program (available from your Daikin Applied sales representative) can optimize the chiller/tower operation for specific buildings in specific locales.

## **Condenser Water Temperature Difference**

The industry standard of 3 gpm/ton or about a 9.5°F (5.3°C) delta-T works well for most applications.

## **Condenser Water Temperature Control**

Condenser water control is an important consideration in chiller plant design since condenser water temperature will directly impact chiller operation and efficiency. When the ambient wet bulb temperature is lower than peak design, the entering condenser water temperature from the cooling tower can be allowed to fall, improving chiller performance. However, operational issues may occur when the condenser water temperatures are either too high or too low. The WMC chiller provides several options to assist the chiller plant designer in providing the optimum control of condenser water temperature.

#### Cooling Tower Control

Control of the cooling tower is required to maintain stability and avoid operational issues. This can be achieved through a BAS or by using the MicroTech® II controller. For systems utilizing a common condenser water loop for multiple purposes, the BAS contractor must provide the control but use of the MicroTech® II output signal is still recommended.

The preferred cooling tower control utilizes a variable speed fan. MicroTech® II will provide a control signal to determine the proper fan speed. It can also control up to four stages of fan cycling. Note that fan cycling can cause cooling tower water temperature to fluctuate as fans stage on/off, potentially adding instability to the system.

Special consideration must be given to starting the chiller when cold condenser water is present, such as with inverted starts or changeover from free (tower) cooling to mechanical cooling. It is required that some method be used to control the condenser water to maintain proper head pressure as indicated by the MicroTech® II controller.

#### Acceptable methods include the following **(Each of these options can be controlled by the MicroTech® II or through a BAS utilizing the MicroTech® II output signals.)**:

1. Three-Way Bypass Valve Operation

A traditional method for building condenser pressure at startup with colder condenser water is with the use of a three-way bypass valve. The device blends warmer water leaving the condenser with cooler water from the cooling tower at the condenser inlet. The bypass valve position will change until full flow from the tower to the condenser is obtained. The MicroTech® II provides only 

16------------------------------------------------



the valve position control signal. Main power to drive the valve's actuator must be provided by the installer. The three-way valve should be located close to the chiller within the equipment room to minimize the volume of water.

2. Two-Way Valve Operation

Another condenser control method is to use a modulating two-way control valve located on the outlet connection of the condenser. The valve will be nearly closed at startup to restrict water flow, which keeps generated heat in the condenser until an acceptable minimum condenser pressure is reached. As heat builds, the valve will open slowly until a full flow condition from the cooling tower is established. A separate power source is required to provide power to the valve actuator.

- 3. VFD Operating with a Condenser Water Pump A third method of condenser control for startup is utilizing a variable frequency drive with the condenser water pump. The speed will change as directed by the MicroTech® II output signal until design flow is reached. Speed adjustments may be required during the initial chiller startup as determined by the service technician.
- **NOTE:** Not using the MicroTech® II logic to control valves and variable frequency drives may result in system instability, capacity reduction, and issues starting the chiller with cold condenser water temperature.

#### Condenser Pump Sequencing

It is recommended to utilize the logic built into theMicroTech®II controller to start the condenser pump and maintain condenser head pressure control. MicroTech® II has the capability to operate a primary pump and a secondary standby pump. The condenser water flow should be stopped when the chiller shuts off. This will conserve energy and prevent refrigerant from migrating to the condenser.

#### Lenient Flow Operation

For chiller startup, the condenser control systems can reduce the flow to low rates, which can make operation of a flow sensing device unreliable. The MicroTech® II controller has a "lenient flow" feature that acts as an override of the flow sensor while protecting the chiller by monitoring a condenser pressure setting that is below the high pressure cutout.

#### Water Side Economizer Cycle Operation

Water side economizers are commonly used for ASHRAE 90.1 compliance and energy savings. This system utilizes a heat exchanger external to the chiller when cold cooling tower water is available to provide cooling. The most common system has a heat exchanger used in conjunction with the chiller's evaporator.

The BAS contractor will need to provide controls for the heat exchanger including isolation valves and temperature control. The BAS contractor will also need to control the isolation valves for the chiller. Changeover from economizer cooling to mechanical cooling requires one of the methods previously mentioned to maintain suitable condenser head pressure.

Contact your local Daikin Applied representative for more information on this application.

17------------------------------------------------



<span id="page-17-0"></span>## <span id="page-17-1"></span>**Retrofit Knockdown**

It is estimated that fifty percent of retrofit applications require partial or complete disassembly of the chiller. Magnitude® WMC chillers are relatively easy to disassemble due to the small compressor size, simplified refrigerant piping, and the absence of a lubrication system with its attendant components and piping. Two knockdown arrangements, Type A shown in [Figure 8](#page-17-2) and Type B shown in [Figure 9](#page-18-0), are available as options.

## **Type A Knockdown, "Bolt-Together Construction"**

Chillers are built and shipped completely assembled with bolt-together construction on major components for field disassembly and reassembly on the job site.

## <span id="page-17-2"></span>*Figure 8: Type A Knockdown*

## **Type A Scope:**

- Chiller components are manufactured with bolt-together construction designed for field disassembly and reassembly on-site.
- Unit ships completely assembled to the jobsite.
- Suction and discharge lines have bolt-on flanges.
- Motor cooling line is brazed at mechanical connections (see Detail B in.
- Unit ships with vessel and/or head insulation, if ordered.
- Unit ships with full factory refrigerant charge in the chiller.
- Unit ships with replacement refrigerant gaskets and O-rings, stick-on wire ties, and touch-up paint.
- Unit is fully tested at the factory prior to shipment.
- Site disassembly and reassembly must be supervised or completed by Daikin Applied service personnel.
- Blockoff plates are required to cover any refrigerant connection left open for extended periods of time. Contact Daikin Applied service to obtain these parts.
- Ideal for retrofit applications where site diassembly is needed due to installation clearances.

18------------------------------------------------



### **Type B Knockdown, "Partial Disassembly"**

Compressor(s), power boxes and control box are removed and shipped on separate skids; combined vessel stack is shipped together as a sub-assembly.

#### *Figure 9: Type B Knockdown*

<span id="page-18-0"></span>#### **Type B Scope:**

- Compressor(s), power box, and control box are removed (at the factory) and shipped on separate skids; vessel stack is shipped as a complete sub-assembly.
- All associated piping and wiring remain attached, if possible.
- Suction and discharge lines have bolt-on flanges and, if possible, remain attached.
- All free piping ends are capped.
- Unit ships with vessel and/or head insulation, if ordered.
- Refrigerant will not be shipped with the chiller and must be procured by others.
- Compressor(s) and vessels receive an inert gas holding charge.
- Unit ships with replacement refrigerant gaskets and O-rings, stick-on wire ties, and touch-up paint.
- Unit is fully tested at the factory prior to shipment.
- Site reassembly must be supervised or completed by Daikin Applied service personnel. Cost for unit resassembly and supervision by Daikin Applied service is not included in the purchase price of the equipment. Contact Daikin Applied service for pricing.
- Ideal for retrofit applications where it is desired that the compressor(s), power box, and control box be removed at the factory, prior to shipment, and where refrigerant may be secured by others.

19------------------------------------------------



**Engineering Guide Specifications**

## **MAGNITUDE® MAGNETIC BEARING CENTRIFUGAL CHILLERS**

## <span id="page-19-0"></span>**PART 1 - GENERAL**

## **1.1 SUMMARY**

A. Section includes design, performance criteria, refrigerants, controls, and installation requirements for water-cooled centrifugal chillers.

## **1.2 REFERENCES**

A. Comply with the following codes and standards: AHRI 550/590, AHRI 575, NEC, ANSI/ASHRAE 15, OSHA as adopted by the State, ETL, ASME Section VIII

## **1.3 SUBMITTALS**

- A. Submittals shall include the following:
	- 1. Dimensioned plan and elevation view, including required clearances, and location of all field piping and electrical connections.
	- 2. Summaries of all auxiliary utility requirements such as: electricity, water, air, etc. Summary shall indicate quality and quantity of each required utility.
	- 3. Diagram of control system indicating points for field interface and field connection. Diagram shall fully depict field and factory wiring.
	- 4. Manufacturer's certified performance data at full load plus IPLV or NPLV.
	- 5. Installation and Operating Manuals.

## **1.4 QUALITY ASSURANCE**

- A. Regulatory Requirements: Comply with the codes and standards in Section 1.2.
- B. Chiller manufacturer plant shall be ISO 9001 and ISO 14001 Certified.
- C. The chiller shall be factory tested as standard at the manufacturer's plant prior to shipment.

## **1.5 DELIVERY AND HANDLING**

A. Chillers shall be delivered to the job site completely assembled and charged with R-134a or R-513A refrigerant and be shipped on skids with a weather resistant cover.

– OR –

- A. [For Type A Knockdowns] The unit shall be delivered to the job site completely assembled and charged with refrigerant and ready for field knockdown. Contractor shall leak test, recover refrigerant, evacuate, and charge with refrigerant after reassembly.
	- OR –
- A. [For Type B Knockdowns] The compressor, suction and discharge piping, VFD power panel and touch screen shall be removed and shipped separately. All wiring and piping shall remain attached where possible. The remaining loose parts shall be packaged in a separate crate. The unit is to be factory tested and shipped with an inert gas holding charge, evaporator insulated and a kit for compressor insulation. Contractor shall leak test, evacuate and charge with refrigerant after reassembly.
- B. Comply with the manufacturer's instructions for rigging and transporting units. Leave protective covers in place until installation.

### **1.6 MAINTENANCE**

A. Maintenance of the chillers in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations as published in the installation and maintenance manuals shall be the responsibility of the owner.

## **PART 2 - PRODUCTS**

## **2.1 ACCEPTABLE MANUFACTURERS**

- A. Basis of Design Daikin Magnitude® model WMC, including the standard product features and all special features required per the plans and specifications.
- B. Equal Products Equipment manufactured by [ENTER MANUFACTURER NAME HERE] may be acceptable as an equal. Naming these products as equal does not imply that their standard construction or configuration is acceptable or meets the specifications. Equipment proposed "as equal", must meet the specifications including all architectural, mechanical, electrical, and structural details, all scheduled performance and the job design, plans and specifications.

### **2.2 UNIT DESCRIPTION**

- A. Provide and install as shown on the plans a factory assembled, charged, and tested water-cooled packaged centrifugal chiller. Chillers shall have no more than two oil-free, magnetic bearing, semi-hermetic centrifugal compressors (no exceptions). [For TMC models] Provide and install as shown on the plans factory assembled, factory charged, magnetic bearing compressor water heater in the quantity specified. Chillers shall have no more than two oil-free, magnetic bearing, semi-hermetic centrifugal compressors with heat recovery capability.
- B. Each compressor shall have an integrated variablefrequency drive operating in concert with inlet guide vanes for optimized full and part load efficiency. On

20------------------------------------------------

| 0           | 1           | 2           | 3           | 4           | 5           | 6           | 7           | 8           |
|:------------|:------------|:------------|:------------|:------------|:------------|:------------|:------------|:------------|
| Octave Band | Octave Band | Octave Band | Octave Band | Octave Band | Octave Band | Octave Band | Octave Band | Overall dBA |
| 63.0        | 125.0       | 250.0       | 500.0       | 1000.0      | 2000.0      | 4000.0      | 8000.0      | 8000.0      |
|             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |



two-compressor units, the evaporator and condenser refrigerant sides and the expansion valve shall be common and the chiller shall be capable of running on one compressor with the other compressor or any of its auxiliaries inoperable or removed.

## **2.3 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS**

- A. General: Provide a complete water-cooled, semihermetic oil-free centrifugal compressor water chiller or heater as specified herein. The unit shall be provided according to standards indicated in Section 1.2. In general, unit shall consist of one or two magnetic bearing, completely oil-free centrifugal compressors [with water heaters for TMC models], refrigerant, condenser and evaporator, and control systems including integrated variable frequency drive, operating controls and equipment protection controls. Chillers shall be charged with R-134a or R-513A refrigerant. If manufacturer offers a chiller using any HCFC refrigerant, manufacturer shall provide, in writing, documentation signed by an officer of the company assuring refrigerant availability and price schedule for a 20-year period.
- B. The entire chiller system, including all pressure vessels, shall remain above atmospheric pressure during all operating conditions and during shut down to ensure that non-condensables and moisture do not contaminate the refrigerant and chiller system. If any portion of the chiller system is below atmospheric pressure during either operation or shut down, the manufacturer shall include, at no charge:
	- 1. A complete purge system capable of removing noncondensables and moisture during operation and shut-down.
	- 2. A 20-year purge maintenance agreement that provides parts, labor, and all preventative maintenance required by the manufacturer's operating and maintenance instructions.
	- 3. The manufacturer shall also include at no charge for a period of 20 years an annual refrigerant analysis report to identify chiller contamination due to vacuum leaks. If the analysis identifies water, acid, or other contaminant levels higher than specified by the manufacturer, the refrigerant must be replaced or returned to the manufacturer's original specification at no cost to the owner.
	- 4. The manufacturer shall include a factory-installed and wired system that will enable service personnel to readily elevate the vessel pressure during shutdown to facilitate leak testing.
- C. Performance: Refer to chiller performance rating.
- D. Acoustics: Sound pressure for the unit shall not exceed the following specified levels. Provide the necessary

acoustic treatment to chiller as required. Sound data shall be measured in dB according to AHRI Standard 575 and shall include overall dBA. Data shall be the highest levels recorded at all load points.


## **2.4 CHILLER COMPONENTS**

#### A. Compressors:

- 1. The unit shall utilize magnetic bearing, oil-free, semihermetic centrifugal compressors [with water heater for TMC models]. The compressor drive train shall be capable of coming to a controlled, safe stop in the event of a power failure.
- 2. The motor shall be of the semi-hermetic type, of sufficient size to efficiently fulfill compressor horsepower requirements. It shall be liquid refrigerant cooled with internal thermal sensing devices in the stator windings. The motor shall be designed for variable frequency drive operation.
	- a. If the compressor design requires a shaft seal to contain the refrigerant, the manufacturer shall supply a 20 year parts and labor warranty on the shaft seal and a lifetime refrigerant replacement warranty if a seal failure leads to refrigerant loss, or the chiller manufacturer shall assume all costs to supply and install a self contained air conditioning system in the mechanical space sized to handle the maximum heat output of the open drive motor. The energy required to operate this air conditioning system shall be added to the chiller power at all rating points for energy evaluation purposes.
	- b. If the compressor/motor uses any form of antifriction bearing (roller, ball, etc), the chiller manufacturer shall provide the following at no additional charge:
		- A 20-year bearing warranty and all preventative maintenance as specified by the manufacturer's published maintenance instructions.
		- At start up, a three-axis vibration analysis and written report to establish bearing condition baseline.
		- An annual three-axis vibration analysis and written report indicating bearing condition.
- 3. The chiller shall be equipped with an air-cooled or integrated refrigerant-cooled Variable Frequency Drive to automatically regulate compressor speed

21------------------------------------------------



in response to cooling load and the compressor pressure lift requirement. If a condenser water-cooled VFD is supplied, the manufacturer shall supply factory installed dual water filters with a bypass valve and pressure differential switch factory wired to the chiller control panel to indicate that a filter has clogged and requires service. The pressure differential switch shall also provide a separate dry contact which can be connected to the BAS system as a means of notifying operating personnel of the need to service the filters. If the condenser cooling circuit includes an intermediate heat exchanger, it must be of the brush cleanable shell and tube style. Brazed plate heat exchangers which cannot be field cleaned are not acceptable. Movable inlet guide vanes and variable compressor speed, shall provide unloading. The chiller controls shall coordinate compressor speed and guide vane position to optimize chiller efficiency.

- 4. [OPTIONAL] The chiller shall be equipped with a factory-mounted and wired passive harmonic filter guaranteed to meet the IEEE Standard 519 at an Isc/ IL ratio greater than 20.
- B. Evaporator and Condenser:
	- 1. The evaporator and condenser shall be separate vessels of the shell-and-tube type, designed, constructed, tested and stamped according to the requirements of the ASME Code, Section VIII. The tubes shall be individually replaceable and secured to the intermediate supports without rolling.
	- 2. The evaporator shall be flooded type with [0.025 in.] –OR– [0.028 in.] –OR– [0.035 in.] wall [copper] –OR– [90/10 CuNi] tubes rolled into [carbon steel] –OR– [ceramic-coated steel] tubesheets. The water side shall be designed for a minimum of [150 psig] –OR– [300 psig]. The heads shall be [carbon steel] –OR– [epoxy-coated steel] –OR– [Monel-clad] –OR– [Stainless Steel]. Water connections shall be grooved suitable for [grooved couplings] –OR– [flanged connections]. The evaporator shall have [dished heads with valved drain and vent connections] – OR– [shall be equipped with marine waterboxes with removable covers and vent and drain connections]. The evaporator shall have [right-hand] –OR– [lefthand] connections when looking at the unit control panel.
	- 3. The condenser shall have [0.025 in.] –OR– [0.028 in.] –OR– [0.035 in.] wall [copper] –OR– [90/10 CuNi] –OR– [70/30 CuNi] –OR– [stainless steel] –OR– [titanium] tubes rolled into [carbon steel] – OR– [Monel-clad] –OR– [stainless steel clad] –OR– [titanium-clad] –OR– [ceramic-coated] tube sheets. Water connections shall be [grooved suitable for

grooved couplings]—OR– [flanged]. The water side shall be designed for a minimum of [150 psig] –OR– [300 psig]. The condenser shall have [dished heads with valved drain and vent connections] –OR– [shall be equipped with marine waterboxes with removable covers and vent and drain connections]. The condenser shall have [right-hand]

–OR– [left-hand] connections when looking at the unit control panel.

- 4. Provide sufficient isolation valves and condenser volume to hold the full unit refrigerant charge in the condenser during servicing or provide a separate pumpout system and storage tank sufficient to hold the charge of the largest unit being furnished.
- 5. An electronic expansion valve shall control refrigerant flow to the evaporator. Fixed orifice devices or float controls with hot gas bypass are not acceptable because of inefficient control at low load conditions. The liquid line shall have moisture indicating sight glass.
- 6. Re-seating type spring loaded pressure relief valves according to ASHRAE-15 safety code shall be furnished. The evaporator shall be provided with single or multiple valves. The condenser shall be provided with dual relief valves equipped with a transfer valve so one relief valve can be removed for testing or replacement without loss of refrigerant or removal of refrigerant from the condenser. Rupture disks are not acceptable.
- 7. [OPTIONAL] The evaporator shall be insulated with [3/4 in.] OR [1.5 in.] thick CFC and HCFC-free closedcell flexible elastomeric foam insulation material with 100% adhesive coverage. The insulation shall have an additional outer protective layer of 3mm thick PE embossed film to provide superior damage resistance. Insulation without the protective outer film shall not be acceptable. UV resistance level shall meet or exceed a rating of 'Good' in accordance with the UNI ISO 4892 - 2/94 testing method.
- 8. [OPTIONAL] The evaporator waterbox shall be insulated with UL recognized 3/4 inch OR 1 ½ inch closed cell insulation. All joints and seams shall be carefully sealed to form a vapor barrier.
- 9. Provide factory-mounted and wired, thermaldispersion water flow switches on each vessel to prevent unit operation with no or low water flow.

22------------------------------------------------



- C. Vibration Isolation
	- 1. Provide neoprene waffle-type vibration isolators for each corner of the unit.
- D. Power Connections
	- 1. Power connection shall be single point to a factorymounted disconnect switch OR shall be multipoint to each compressor power panel on two-compressor units.
- E. Chiller Control
	- 1. The unit shall have a microprocessor-based control system consisting of a touch-screen operator interface and a unit controller.
	- 2. The touch-screen shall display the unit operating parameters, accept setpoint changes (multi-level password protected) and be capable of resetting faults and alarms. The following parameters shall be displayed on the home screen and also as trend curves on the trend screen:
		- Entering and leaving chilled and condenser water temperatures
		- Evaporator and condenser saturated refrigerant pressures
		- Percent of 100% speed (per compressor)
		- % of rated load amps for entire unit
	- 3. In addition to the trended items above, all other important real-time operating parameters shall also be shown on the touch-screen. These items shall be displayed on a chiller graphic showing each component. At a minimum, the following critical areas must be monitored:
		- Compressor actual speed, maximum speed, percent speed
		- Evaporator water in and out temperatures, refrigerant pressure and temperature
		- Condenser water in and out temperatures, refrigerant pressure and temperature
		- Liquid line temperature
		- Chilled water setpoint
		- Compressor and unit state and input and output digital and analog values
	- 4. A fault history shall be displayed using an easy to decipher, color coded set of messages that are date and time stamped. The alarm history shall be downloadable from the unit's USB port. An operating and maintenance manual specific for the unit shall be viewable on the screen and downloadable.
	- 5. All setpoints shall be viewable and changeable (multilevel password protected) on the touch screen and include setpoint description and range of set values.
- 6. Automatic corrective action to reduce unnecessary cycling shall be accomplished through preemptive control of low evaporator or high discharge pressure conditions to keep the unit operating through abnormal transient conditions.
- 7. The chiller shall be capable of sequencing up to four other similar chillers for WMC models. The contractor shall furnish and wire network isolators for n-1 units.
- 8. The chiller shall be capable of automatic control of: evaporator and condenser pumps (primary and standby), up to 3 stages of cooling tower fan cycling control and a tower modulating bypass valve or cooling tower fan variable frequency drive.
- 9. [OPTIONAL] The factory mounted controller(s) shall support operation on a BACnet®, Modbus® or LonWorks® network via one of the data link / physical layers listed below as specified by the successful Building Automation System (BAS) supplier.
	- Modbus®
	- BACnet® MS/TP master (Clause 9)
	- BACnet® IP, (Annex J)
	- BACnet® ISO 8802-3, (Ethernet)
	- LonTalk® FTT-10A. The unit controller shall be LonMark® certified.
- 10. The information communicated between the BAS and the factory mounted unit controllers shall include the reading and writing of data to allow unit monitoring, control and alarm notification as specified in the unit sequence of operation and the unit points list.
- 11. For chillers communicating over a LonMark® network, the corresponding LonMark® eXternal Interface File (XIF) shall be provided with the chiller submittal data.
- 12. All communication from the chiller unit controller as specified in the points list shall be via standard BACnet® objects. Proprietary BACnet® objects shall not be allowed. BACnet® communications shall conform to the BACnet® protocol (ANSI/ ASHRAE135-2001). A BACnet® Protocol Implementation Conformance Statement (PICS) shall be provided along with the unit submittal.
- 13. [OPTIONAL] The chiller shall be equipped with the capability to restart and reach full load quickly in the event of a power interruption. The compressor shall be capable of restarting within 43 seconds after power is restored and shall reach 80% load within 120 seconds. Chillers not able to restart or load within this time frame shall include a properly sized thermal storage tank to maintain temperature stability in the system.
- 14. [TMC models only] The unit shall be capable of operating as a heat-recovery water heater or as a

23------------------------------------------------



water-cooled chiller. Changeover shall be by a panelmounted Heat/Cool switch or by a remote, digital input signal. When in the heating mode, unit capacity shall be controlled by a temperature sensor in the leaving condenser (hot) water. Reset of leaving water temperature based on condenser Delta-T shall be provided. This control strategy shall hold the entering water temperature approximately constant and lower the leaving water temperature proportionally to the heating load. When in the cooling mode, unit capacity shall be controlled by the leaving evaporator water temperature. Reset shall be available based on the return temperature or a 4-20mA external signal.

## **2.5. OPTIONAL ITEMS**

- A. The following optional items shall be furnished:
	- 1. Open OR closed export crate
	- 2. Pumpout unit, with or without storage vessel
	- 3. Refrigerant monitor
	- 4. Non-witness performance test (water only) in accordance with procedures and to the tolerances contained in AHRI Standard 550/590.

– OR –

Witness performance test (water only) in accordance with procedures and to the tolerances contained in AHRI Standard 550/590.

5. OSHPD Certification: The chiller shall be OSHPD Pre-Approved per OSP–0116-10 and be so labeled. The chiller shall be seismically certified to Short Period Design Spectral Response SDS =2.0 gravities at roof height (z/h=1.0) and SDS =2.5 @ z/h=0 (ground). The chiller must be mounted to a rigid base and may use neoprene waffle vibration pads.

– OR –

IBC Certification: The chiller shall be certified to the following codes and standards; 2009 IBC, 2010 CBC, ICC-ES AC-156, ASCE 7-05. The chiller must be mounted to a rigid base and may use neoprene waffle vibration pads.

## **PART 3 - EXECUTION**

## **3.1 INSTALLATION**

- A. Installing contractor to:
	- 1. Install per manufacturer's requirements, shop drawings, and contract documents.
	- 2. Adjust chiller alignment on foundations, or subbases as called for on drawings.
	- 3. Arrange piping to allow for dismantling to permit head removal and tube cleaning.
	- 4. Coordinate electrical installation with electrical contractor.
	- 5. Coordinate controls with control contractor.
	- 6. Provide all material required for a fully operational and functional chiller.

## **3.2 START-UP**

A. Factory Start-Up Services: Provide for as long a time as is necessary to ensure proper operation of the unit, but in no case for less than two full working days. During the period of start-up, the start-up technician shall instruct the owner's representative in proper care and operation of the unit.

24------------------------------------------------



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

25------------------------------------------------



## *Daikin Applied Training and Development*

Now that you have made an investment in modern, efficient Daikin Applied equipment, its care should be a high priority. For training information on all Daikin Applied HVAC products, please visit us at <www.DaikinApplied.com> and click on Training, or call 540-248-9646 and ask for the Training Department.

## *Warranty*

All Daikin Applied equipment is sold pursuant to its standard terms and conditions of sale, including Limited Product Warranty. Consult your local Daikin Applied representative for warranty details. To find your local Daikin Applied representative, go to <www.DaikinApplied.com>.

## *Aftermarket Services*

To find your local parts office, visit <www.DaikinApplied.com> or call 800-37PARTS (800-377-2787). To find your local service office, visit <www.DaikinApplied.com> or call 800-432-1342.

This document contains the most current product information as of this printing. For the most up-to-date product information, please go to [www.DaikinApplied.com.](www.DaikinApplied.com)

Products manufactured in an ISO Certified Facility.